## Deprecating strange things

### `DateTimePeriod.plus`

Issue: https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx-datetime/issues/381

In brief: as implemented, there doesn't seem to be any useful properties to
`period1 + period2` that are guaranteed to hold.
One would probably expect that `(something + period1) + period2` is the
same as `something + (period1 + period2)`, but it's not true even for
`LocalDate` and `DatePeriod`, where there are no timezone transitions involved.
If we don't consider `period1 + period2` to be a period that can be split into
several periods, then *what* is it and *why* would one knowingly use it?

### `Clock.asTimeSource`

Issue: https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx-datetime/issues/372

`TimeSource` is defined as
> A source of time for measuring time intervals.

`Clock` is expressly an arbitrary source of `Instant` values, not guaranteed to
be monotonic. For example, `Clock.System` can jump by as much as several
seconds in any direction in practice when it's received adjusted values.
As such, measuring time using `Clock` is not always meaningful.

In theory, one could possess an accurate source of `Instant` values (like an
atomic clock), but then, they could just implement `TimeMark` and `Clock`
separately, without tying their `TimeMark` implementation to the `Instant`
representation, possibly using `AbstractLongTimeSource`.

## Versioning the timezone database

PR: https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx-datetime/pull/366

As part of implementing Wasm/WASI, the Wasm team introduced utilities for
shipping a custom timezone database with kotlinx-datetime.

Currently, the timezone database is implemented as a library *on which*
kotlinx-datetime depends and which provides the raw data for the library
to parse.

How do we version the timezone database?
For now, this is a WASI-specific problem, but we will have to decide on this
at some point anyway.

Constraints:

* Our ABI may change. It should be clear to the users when and how this happens.
* We don't want to tie the release cycle of our whole library to the releases
  of new timezone databases.
* The users should be able to update the timezone database without updating
  the library itself, up to a point.
* Using an old timezone database with the new library seems useless.

Some of the possible approaches:

* Just the same version as the library and *do* tie the release cycle to the
  timezone database updates, but also keep a compatibility chart that explains
  how far can the library version fall behind the timezone database version.
* Just use the version of the timezone database and keep a compatibility chart.
* Include both the library version and the timezone database version.
  When the library version updates, publish a new timezone database just for it;
  when the timezone database changes, publish a new version for every one of
  the last several releases of the library.
  - We would be publishing a ton of equivalent artifacts that differ only
    in their versions!
* Include both the library version and the timezone database version.
  When the library version updates, do nothing.
  When the timezone database changes, publish a new version only for the
  earliest supported library version.
  - Same as the "just the timezone database version" option, but one doesn't
    need to consult the chart when the Dependabot proposes an update; in
    exchange, the versioning scheme becomes more confusing.

## Custom serializers

Serializers that we already have:

* ISO: `DateTimePeriodIso8601Serializer`, `DatePeriodIso8601Serializer`,
  `InstantIso8601Serializer`, `LocalDateIso8601Serializer`,
  `LocalDateTimeIso8601Serializer`, `LocalTimeIso8601Serializer`;
* Component-based: `DateTimePeriodComponentSerializer`,
  `DatePeriodComponentSerializer`, `InstantComponentSerializer`,
  `LocalDateComponentSerializer`, `LocalDateTimeComponentSerializer`,
  `LocalTimeIso8601Serializer`;
* Some other serializers for structures that don't support formatting.

How do we introduce these serializers?

- `LocalDateCustomSerializer`?
- `LocalDateSerializer`, with the ISO format being the default, and removing the
  ISO serializers?

How does one idiomatically use them? From
https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx-datetime/issues/350#issuecomment-1980934995 :

```kotlin
object SlovakLocalDateSerializer : LocalDateCustomSerializer(LocalDate.Format {
    dayOfMonth(Padding.NONE)
    char('.')
    optional { char(' ') }
    monthNumber(Padding.NONE)
    char('.')
    optional { char(' ') }
    year(Padding.NONE)
})

@Serializable
data class Example(
    @Serializable(with = SlovakLocalDateSerializer::class)
    val exampleDate: LocalDate?,
)
```

Is it expected that people would inherit from the serializer classes and make
objects out of them?

What do we pass to the constructor?

* A `DateTimeFormat`,
* An action that builds the format,
* Both, in separate constructors?

Constructors or constructor functions?
